---
Pr-id: Algorithmic Anxiety: A Kierkegaardian Inquiry into the Imaginary of Possibility
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 32
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 02
Article-title: chapter 1
Article-status: accepted
Author: Patricia de Vries
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# 1. From Algorithmic Culture to Algorithmic Anxiety 

> We would rather be ruined than changed
> 
> We would rather die in our dread
> 
> Than climb the cross of the moment
> 
> And let our illusions die.
>
> — W.H. Auden, *The Age of Anxiety*

The point of departure of this chapter is the observation that facial
recognition algorithms, trading algorithms and search algorithms have
become addressees of anxiety in public debate, in academic disciplines,
and contemporary art. The entanglement of human beings in algorithmic
networks has become a cause of concern for artists and critics alike.
The anxiety evoked by algorithms is not a sentimental subjectivity or a
personal pathology related to one's feelings regarding algorithms. What
artists and academics share are worries about the possible effects
caused by the developing entwinement of humans with algorithms on
societies and the people living in them. This has created a fervor
around the supposed corresponding loss of certain aspects of the self,
of what constitutes visible reality, and of the possible affordances of
algorithmically produced information on socio-political relations.

As mentioned in the introduction, I am not primarily concerned about the
computational, mathematic or technical aspects of algorithms — what they
are or what they do. Neither do I seek to find one underlying and
comprehensive cause for a multitude of anxieties, as that would not do
justice to the different concerns algorithms raise and also runs the
risks of falling in the trap of generalization. The different anxieties
conditioned by different types of entanglements reveal a more
complicated image. Therefore, the following chapters are structured
around specific types of algorithms and the different anxieties they
inspire.

To start this chapter, I briefly introduce the main focus points of
concern in the academic literature about the close-knit relationship of
humans to algorithms — namely, what I describe as algorithmic
governance, algorithmic selves, algorithmic opacity, and algorithmic
replacement. In the second part of this chapter, I present an outline of
the central concepts and dynamics that structures Kierkegaard's
conception of anxiety — the self as a synthesis, the limits of
knowledge, and the possible. Anxiety concerns the possibility of the
possible. The possible exceeds the self and defies rationalization,
systematization, prediction, and calculation. After sketching out the
major constituents of Kierkegaard’s account of anxiety, I move to and
close this chapter with a first rough sketch of the concept of
algorithmic anxiety, which will be further developed in the chapters
that follow this one.

## Algorithmic Governance

Concerns about the dynamics and mechanics between algorithmic systems
and human actors and between the facial recognition algorithms, trading
algorithms and search algorithms and the social seem to be widely shared
amongst a growing group of academics. Algorithms, in general, are
associated with having and exerting commanding powers. The nature and
extent of these powers are based on the different ideas critics have of
how algorithms organise, produce, order or impede socio-political life.
Nicholas Diakopoulos, for instance, sees algorithms as powerful
wire-pullers. He writes: ‘We're living in a world now where algorithms
adjudicate more and more consequential decisions in our lives.
Algorithms, driven by vast troves of data, are the new power brokers in
society’.[^ch01_1] In *Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases
Inequality and Threatens Democracy,* Cathy O’Neil writes that decisions
such as whether someone gets a job, gets into a particular college, gets
sentenced to jail, gets a loan or is considered a possible fraud, is
increasingly controlled by algorithmic routines.[^ch01_2] What she calls
‘weapons of math destruction’ are ‘churning away in every conceivable
industry’.[^ch01_3] This situation ‘slams doors in the face of millions of
people, often for the flimsiest of reasons, and offer no appeal’, she
argues.[^ch01_4] Antoinette Rouvroy and Thomas Berns speak of ‘algorithmic
governmentality’.[^ch01_5] They argue that the ubiquity and trust in
algorithms and the logic of numbers on which they are centered mark a
‘transition from statistical governance to algorithmic governance’ and
that this algorithmic governmentally can be described as ‘a type of
rationality founded on the automated collection, aggregation and
analysis of big data so as to model, anticipate and pre-emptively affect
possible behaviours’.[^ch01_6] Algorithmic governance is self-referential,
they contend. ‘\[A\]lgorithmic governance “creates” a reality at least
as much as it records it.’[^ch01_7] Referring to Rouvroy and Berns in his
book *We Are Data: Algorithms and the Making of our Digital Selves*,
John Cheney-Lippold claims that ‘when our embodied individualities get
ignored, we increasingly lose control not just over life but over how
life itself is defined’.[^ch01_8] Matteo Pasquinelli would likely agree. He
makes a similar point when he contends that algorithms operate as an
automated bureaucracy that silently reinforces dominant patterns of
behavior, where the norm of what counts as dominant behavior is
standardized by algorithms.[^ch01_9] Tarleton Gillespie follows a similar
line. He argues that algorithms are part of mechanisms that privilege
quantification, proceduralization and automation in human
endeavors.[^ch01_10] I will discuss concerns about the algorithmic governance
of socio-political life, specifically in relation to facial recognition
algorithms in Chapter 2, and also in Chapter 3. Chapter 2 focuses on
masks and camouflage wear as artistic responses to facial recognition
algorithms, and Chapter 3 explores the spectral imaginary of trading
algorithms.

## Algorithmic Selves

As algorithms are deployed by the governments, institutions and
corporations that impact on individual lives, there is concern amongst
artists and critics about the social implications of these often
invisible and secretive algorithmic practices, specifically in relation
to the way individuals are perceived and treated. Cheney-Lippold argues,
‘who we are in the face of algorithmic interpretation is who we are
computationally calculated to be’.[^ch01_11] Who you are, he writes, is
decided by advertisers, marketeers, and governments’ their secretive,
proprietary algorithmic scripts, recasting identity ‘into the exclusive,
private parlance of capital or state power’.[^ch01_12] Data analytics firms
may mark an employee as ‘high cost’ or as ‘unreliable worker’ without
their knowledge or participation.[^ch01_13] Stefania Milan puts it thus:
‘creators, owners and exploiters of algorithms control much of our
digital life’ and ‘deeply influence our ways of making sense of
interpersonal and spatial interactions \[…\] altering our perception of
self and our relational being-in-the-world’.[^ch01_14] ‘\[I\]ndividuals,’ she
fears, ‘become merely a pile of data’.[^ch01_15] Adam Morris argues that
people are treated ‘as a conduit of wealth’ and ‘a mine of data’ to the
twin imperatives of marketing and surveillance.[^ch01_16] He associates data
mining and data profiling by companies and governments as a form of
exposure. These practices ‘give transparency to the fundamental opacity
of the population’, he argues.[^ch01_17] Finally, Tarleton Gillespie is
worried about the ways algorithms influence our notions of ourselves. He
is specifically concerned about search engine algorithms. Search
algorithms shape ways of relating to the self, Gillespie argues. He
explains how search engine algorithms self-referentially present publics
back to themselves and in doing so ‘shape a public's sense of itself’
and generate a ‘calculated publics’.[^ch01_18]

Algorithms also shape our social life. Stephanie Hankey and Marek
Tuszynski argue in *Nervous Systems* that every individual, locked
inside algorithmic filter bubbles, ‘becomes a digit, a dot, a
self-entered data point’.[^ch01_19] Our social life is ‘filtered into
patterns’, Hankey and Tuszynski claim, and in this process, subjectivity
changes fundamentally while normative patterns are reinforced,
‘flattening and smoothing out our lifeworlds and singling out any form
of dissent’.[^ch01_20] In this context, Pasquinelli writes about an
‘epistemic revolution comparable to previous paradigm shifts, displacing
the centrality of the human’.[^ch01_21] I will discuss algorithmic anxiety
about rigid algorithmic regimes that conscript the self and its
lifeworld further in Chapter 2, as part of the artistic portrayals of
facial recognition algorithms. I will also further analyze the
self-referential filter bubbles that search algorithms produce in
Chapter 4, as part of the assessment of artistic representations of
Google’s search engine algorithms.

## Algorithmic Opacity

The opacity of algorithms is another dominant concern among artists and
critics. Again and again, in art and academia, algorithms are invoked as
omnipresent yet invisible, powerful yet elusive, inscrutable yet
invasive, and shaping social worlds and the people living in them. I
address anxiety as a response to the opacity and unknowability of
algorithms repeatedly in artistic portrayals of trading algorithms and
search algorithms in, respectively, Chapters 3 and 4. For context, we
can identify several reasons for this response.

For one, algorithms' operational mechanisms cannot be observed at work.
Algorithmic routines are mostly invisible, not in the least because of
the secrecy surrounding algorithms used by tech giants, for-profit
corporations and on financial markets. ‘Many of the algorithms we
encounter daily are proprietarily owned — and thus opaque and
inaccessible to outside critique’, Michele Willson explains.[^ch01_22]
Trade-secret protection governs many of the algorithms that are used
daily, notably on the financial markets and in search engines. The
opacity surrounding algorithms has led Frank Pasquale to contend that we
live in a black box society, or a society in which ‘decisions that used
to be made by humans are now made by algorithms of which we know little
to nothing’.[^ch01_23] Pasquale calls for transparency and intelligibility of
these systems and the possibility of auditing algorithms. As regards to
search algorithms, he argues that ‘without knowing what Google actually
does when it ranks sites, we cannot assess when it is acting in good
faith to help users, and when it is biasing results to favour its own
commercial interests’.[^ch01_24] The encoded rules of algorithms, which he
calls ‘enigmatic technologies’[^ch01_25] and their concomitant values, biases
and prerogatives, are well-hidden and guarded secrets that must be
opened to inspection, according to Pasquale, because they ‘undermine the
openness of our society and the fairness of our markets’.[^ch01_26]

Secondly, according to Jenna Burrell, the opaqueness of algorithmic
systems is not limited to corporate secrecy and hence cannot be
countered by inspection. Algorithmic opacity stems from the level of
technical complexity and the expertise required to understand the entire
structure of the software algorithms are embedded in.[^ch01_27] Algorithmic
opacity also relates to the techniques used in algorithms and the
complexity of and the scale distinctive to algorithmic systems.[^ch01_28]
Machine learning algorithms, for example, are deployed in areas where
they augment or replace white-collar labor and in ‘consequential
\[classification\] processes that were previously human-determined’ —
such as credit evaluation and insurance or loan qualification, but also
in search engines, spam filters and for marketing purposes.[^ch01_29]
However, the high speed at which these algorithms calculate billions of
data examples and tens of thousands of features of data in a matter of
microseconds makes them opaque and illegible to humans. Their internal
decision logic, Burrell points out, ‘is altered as it “learns” on
training data. \[…\] While datasets may be extremely large but possible
to comprehend, and code may be written with clarity, the interplay
between the two in the mechanism of the algorithm is what yields the
complexity (and thus opacity)’.[^ch01_30] The artistic responses to the
different forms of opacity and incomprehensibility of algorithms will be
discussed predominantly in Chapter 3.

## Algorithmic Replacement

Future scenarios of human displacement or replacement by algorithms are
a topic of concern amongst critics of algorithmic culture. Anxieties
about the future self are widespread in the work of critics of
algorithmic culture. They range from scenarios of automated societies in
which fascism reigns with the helping hand of a small elite running
algorithmic systems, or — and worse — scenarios in which humans live in
the service of self-operating algorithms, that may, at some point in the
future, turn against humans when their services are no longer needed. In
his often-cited book *Automate This: How Algorithms Came to Rule Our
World* (2012), Christopher Steiner concedes, ‘the bounds of algorithms
get pushed further each day’.[^ch01_31] He argues that algorithms have
augmented and displaced human labor in a growing number of industries:
‘They’re faster than us, they’re cheaper than us, and, when things work
as they should, they make far fewer mistakes than we do.[^ch01_32] This gives
reason to pause, according to Steiner. He claims that algorithms can
evolve: ‘They observe, experiment, and learn — all independently of
their human creators.’[^ch01_33] Algorithms can create improved algorithms,
Steiner cautions. Worrying about these developments and what it means
for human agency, Steiner contends: ‘As our world shifts from one where
humans have made all of the important decisions to one in which we share
that role with algorithms, the value of superior intellect has increased
at a compounding rate.’[^ch01_34]

On the dark side of replacement theories, being outsmarted by algorithms
is taken as a warning sign for the future of human labor. In part, this
is because intelligence has been used (and is still used) as a ‘fig-leaf
to justify domination and destruction’, Stephen Cave explains in his
essay on the dark history of the concept of intelligence.[^ch01_35] Cave
argues that intelligence is a political concept with a long history as
the rationale for domination. He traces this political conception of
intelligence to Plato's *The Republic*, early Greek experiments with
democracy, and Aristotle’s *Politics*. Not inherited elites — neither
those with the strongest army, nor those who were said to have received
divine instruction — should rule, but the cleverest of men should rule
over the rest. Lest one forgets, to be counted as a citizen of the Greek
polis one had to be a European, educated, *male* citizen. Cave: ‘What
marked the ruler was his command of reason and rationality which both
justified and naturalised his rule over those deemed less intelligent,
irrational, emotional and so forth.’[^ch01_36]

According to Cave, as Westerners have justified their positions of power
and repression of others by virtue of their supposed superior
intelligence, this makes algorithms that outsmart and outperform
Westerners a possible deadly threat.[^ch01_37] Anxieties about human
replacement or displacement have found its way into prominent artworks
that engage with facial recognition algorithms, trading algorithms, and
search algorithms, to which I return in Chapters 2, 3, and 4.

## Kierkegaard’s Concept of Anxiety

In the following section, I provide an outline of the central concepts
and dynamics that structure Kierkegaard’s conception of anxiety — the
self as a synthesis and the self in despair, faith and the limits of
knowledge, and the synthesis between possibility and necessity. But to
start, a few words on Kierkegaard the author, philosopher, theologian,
Socratic ironist, humorist, and novelist.

## A few words on Kierkegaard

Most of Kierkegaard’s philosophical writings do not bear his name; they
were written pseudonymously, though some carry his name as the editor of
the book. A pseudonym makes a point of separating the author from its
written words, acting as a form of indirect communication. In the case
of Kierkegaard, it was not a strategy to protect his anonymity. Multiple
pseudonyms are used by him, creating novel-like characters; these
pseudonyms say different things and reappear in other books, for example
*Stages on Life’s Way* (1845) and *Either/Or*: *A Fragment of Life*
(1843). These pseudonyms represent different personas. In *Either/Or,*
there are multiple personas in the same book with different points of
view, each representing different philosophic standpoints. Yet, they are
all too often (self-)contradictory, too; they are divided by opposing
thoughts or reflect on the contingency of their own deliberations.
Obviously, then, one cannot understand Kierkegaard's philosophy by
reading only one book. However, reading all of his work does not give
its reader a clear and ordered idea of his thinking either. And this is
the point.

Kierkegaard opposed the way philosophy was taught at his time — which
was much dominated by Hegelians. While his contemporaries focused on
over-arching systems of thought and theories of everything, Kierkegaard
opposed this kind of philosophy by *performing* anti-systemic thinking
in his writing, by contradicting himself, taking different positions in
and within his different books, as well as by writing in different
styles and adopting a range of genres. With these different pseudonyms,
styles, genres and positions his oeuvre takes the form of one of his
central concepts, movement at the spot – that I discuss in more detail
below – as well as his conviction that one has to synthesize thinking
and being. One’s thinking ‘should bear on a person’s existence, it
should bear on how life is lived’.[^ch01_38] With the constant play of
positions and stances, he also disorients his readers in order to help
them to remain open to other perspectives and different ways of
understanding being and thinking.

Some of his books — *The Sickness unto Death* (1849)*, Repetition*
(1843) and *Either/Or* among others — are set up as a dialectical
movement between a philosophical and religious approach. But there is
also a dialectic at work within his books. A reader may find shifts in
position, from the particular to the transcendental, from unity to
multiplicity, and from interiority and exteriority — and the reverse.
Further, *The Sickness unto Death* and *The Concept of Anxiety,* the two
works in which he writes about anxiety in relation to conceptions of
self and knowledge, seem thematically related, yet differ in approach,
whilst *Philosophical Fragments* (1844) and *The Sickness unto Death*,
two works in which he writes much about the self and knowledge, seem to
form each other’s counterparts.

Kierkegaard also has a knack for turning phrases and does so throughout
many of his books. For example, subjective truth is described as an
objective uncertainty. Anxiety is described as an antipathetic sympathy.
And 'authenticity' \[*autenticitet*\], which is qualitatively different
from the notion of being ‘genuine’ or a ‘true self’, is described as
stepping into character — ‘*traadt i Charakteer’.*[^ch01_39] The meaning of
the major concepts in his work is never straight forward, and he refuses
to provide a conclusive answer to what the major concepts in his work
mean. Adding to this, Kierkegaard's oeuvre consists of journals,
letters, sermons, poetry, literature, and philosophical tractates, and
all written in diverse styles, tones, formats, and lengths. He mixes
irony with devotional comments on Biblical history, polemics with dense
philosophical writing, and epistolary writings, that at times approach
kitsch, with lyrical tales.

The pseudonyms, the shifting positions, the self-contradiction, the
rhetorical devices, the mockery, the puns, they are not made in jest,
but stress his conviction that we lack a ‘timeless’, ‘impersonal’, or
‘objective’ view from which the world can be understood. His philosophy
is not one of finding *the* truth, but one of questioning what you
thought you knew to be the truth and then questioning *that* truth, too.
Kierkegaard does not want to add to the pile of all-explaining theories,
but rather to unscrew these theories and give them a good kick.
Altogether, this makes his writings bristling with problems of
interpretation and signification. It has resulted in a notoriously
difficult body of work that is resistant to definitions and also to
citation and paraphrase because of its density, complexity and
idiosyncratic style and because of the endless winding on of conflicting
views with no clear resolution. ‘What are we to make of his conception
and your interpretation of anxiety, then?’, you may rightfully ask.
‘That it is embodied, embedded, partial, subject to interpretation, and
time-bound’, is my answer. As Kierkegaard scholar C. Stephen Evans
argues, many of Kierkegaard's ideas are inextricably intertwined, and
the best remedy to this is to sketch key related ideas — which I will
try to do in the following sections.[^ch01_40]

## The Self as a Relational Synthesis 

Kierkegaard links anxiety to forms of being, presence and knowledge.
Kierkegaard’s conception of the self differs from that which is dominant
in western philosophy, which typically views the self as private
conscience, a type of substance, an autonomous entity, or as a subject
of knowledge. In contrast, Kierkegaard rethinks the self as a relational
synthesis. In an often-cited paragraph from *The Sickness unto Death*, he explains in turgid
prose his notion of the self as a synthesis:

> But what is the self? The self is a relation that relates itself to
> itself or is the relation’s relating itself to itself in the relation…
> A human being is a synthesis of the infinite and the finite, of the
> temporal and the eternal, of freedom and necessity, in short, a
> synthesis.[^ch01_41]

The self is relational, a synthesis of contrasting elements and this
synthesis must relate to itself (become self-aware), and it must relate
to something outside of itself. To say that the self is merely a finite
being is to emphasize one side of this synthesis. It is to emphasize
gender, ethnicity, geographic location, abilities, and weaknesses and
aspects of one's social, political, and cultural habitat, which are
indeed finite. They matter to how one appears to the world, how one
appears to oneself, and how the world appears to this self, even though
it is not all that one is and no one can be reduced to these finite
aspects. Many of these things are not up to us to begin with. We cannot
freely choose our gender, ethnicity, the family we are born in, our
place of birth, or numerous other things. We are inseparable from, but
cannot be reduced to, our finitudes. We cannot be reduced to finitudes
as the self is always grounded in something other and something larger
than its finitudes. The self is both individual and social and also
exceeds the individual and the social. Kierkegaard further explains this
in *The Sickness unto Death*. He writes: ‘For the self is the synthesis
of which the finite is the limiting and the infinite the extending
constituent.’[^ch01_42] One does not *have* a self; the self is not a
substance, not a unit or a thing somewhere inside the self.
Kierkegaard's point is, I would argue, that the self is not the sum of
its finite parts but is open to the dimension of the infinite. Thus, a
human being is a synthesis of (f)actual and concrete existence and
abstract infinitude.

With his conception of the self as a relational synthesis, Kierkegaard
rejects what he calls the ‘standard of his age’ which holds the
individual responsible for their own life, without further ado. The
illusion that the individual is the creator of their own life
‘\[leaves\] the individual entirely to himself so that in a stricter
sense he becomes his own creator’.[^ch01_43] That is, within such an
understanding, the individual likens with God. Kierkegaard: ‘It leads
you to think this must be a kingdom of gods, this generation in which I
too have the honour to live. However, that is by no means the
case.’[^ch01_44] In *Either/Or,* he calls the notion of the autonomous self
‘ridiculous’.[^ch01_45] It is ridiculous because any such attempt denies the
existence of God.[^ch01_46] This is not to say that the individual has no
responsibility whatsoever, it is to say that ‘\[e\]very individual,
however original, is still a child of God, of his age, of his nation, of
his family, of his friends. Only thus does he have his truth.’[^ch01_47] It
is to say that a self is inevitably grounded, embedded and situated in
sociality, but also composed of extending constituents that transcend
other people and society. There is a constant tension between what *is*
and what *ought* to be, between necessity and possibility. In
*Concluding Unscientific Postscript*, Kierkegaard describes this dynamic
as if ‘a Pegasus and an old nag were hitched to a carriage’.[^ch01_48] The
self is the dynamic relationship between what has shaped you, or your
historicity of which you are intimately familiar, *and* infinitude and
possibility.

There is the self that is self-aware (aware of its self as a self);
there is the self that is constituted by an unchangeable past and
limited by finitudes and necessities (the self embedded and situated in
a social order with the ideals expressed by the state); and there is the
self that is constituted by possibility and infinity of (the self before
God, or the possible self.[^ch01_49] As the human self exists in relation, we
are not autonomous, and neither are we transparent to ourselves or
others, nor are others transparent to us; there is always something that
slips out of our grasp. One exists in relation, Kierkegaard explains, to
our body, to our abilities and inabilities, to the cognitive skills we
have and lack, to our surroundings, our family, our past and future, the
nation we inhabit, its culture, *and* to the extending constituents of
the infinite, the possible — to God.[^ch01_50] Human existence is the
never-ending attempt to synthesize these limiting and extending aspects,
Kierkegaard explains in *The Sickness unto Death*. It is never-ending
because this attempt to synthesis is never fully realized and, although
some people are more successful than others, tension, contradiction, and
mishap remain. ‘Through being a synthesis the human being can be made
anxious’, he writes.[^ch01_51] Which is to say, because the self is a
relational synthesis of opposites – necessity and possibility, the
temporary and the eternal and finitude and infinity – it experiences
anxiety. Anxiety follows from this delicate and wobbly synthesis that is
the self. He describes the never-ending attempt to synthesis as a
process of becoming in *Concluding Unscientific Postscript*: ‘The
process of becoming is the thinker's very existence’.[^ch01_52] This process
of becoming has no endpoint or resolution; it is a constant striving.
‘How far the subjective thinker might be along that road, whether a long
way or a short, makes no essential difference (it is, after all, just a
finitely relative comparison); as long as he is existing, he is in the
process of becoming’.[^ch01_53] Thus, although this continual striving
directed toward the infinite, the infinite remains unreachable, which
makes existence ‘as pathos-filled as it is comic’.[^ch01_54] As well as
filled with anxiety.

## Anxiety and Despair

Anxiety and despair, two connected concepts in the work of Kierkegaard,
are not personal pathologies. Kierkegaard discusses these concepts
primarily in *The Concept of Anxiety* and *The Sickness unto
Death*. Howard V. Hong argues that the two books ‘might be regarded as a
two-stage explication. Both are based on the concept of man as a
synthesis of the finite and infinite, the temporal and the
eternal’.[^ch01_55] Gregory Beabout explains in *Kierkegaard on Anxiety and
Despair* (1988) that ‘anxiety is the condition for despair’.[^ch01_56] It is
the radical openness of the possible which conditions anxiety.
Kierkegaard understands anxiety as a form of *angst* related to the
unknowability of future possibilities. Anxiety pertains to the
possibility of the possible, to possible events that are unknown and
unknowable and thus cannot be anticipated. He writes: ‘Anyone formed by
anxiety is shaped by possibility.’[^ch01_57] Anxiety seizes when one is
confronted with possibility, at a moment of possible change and the
endless possibilities of that possible change. Anxiety is undetermined
(time), vague and unstilted (ambiguous). Kierkegaard describes anxiety
as an ambiguous power, which both attracts and frightens us and demands
each one of us to relate to it.[^ch01_58] The question is how one relates to
it, how one positions itself in relation to it.

His concept of despair is mapped onto the self as a relational
synthesis. Despair, he explains in *The Sickness unto Death*, is a
mis-relationship between the relations that constitute the self, between
finitude and necessity *and* infinitude and possibility. Despair happens
when the relational synthesis is skewed to one side. In such a
mis-relationship, one side of the relation is emphasized over the other;
one side is overdeveloped, the other underdeveloped. In *The Sickness
unto Death,* Kierkegaard distinguishes different forms of despair by
reflecting upon what each form of despair lacks. Thus, when an
individual tends to infinitude, the despair they feel is caused by a
lack of finitude. Similarly, the despair of finitude lacks infinitude;
the despair of possibility lacks necessity, and the despair of necessity
lacks possibility.[^ch01_59] A person who grounds themselves merely in
infinitude is a person who gets carried away by its daydreams and
fantasies. What is missing in such a situation is ‘to submit to the
necessity in one’s life, to what may be called one’s limitations’.[^ch01_60]
And the other way around: when focused merely on one’s limitation, one
can get lost in determinism, fatalism, nihilism. What is missing then is
a sense of possibility. Despair is conditioned by a lack of balance
between the finite and infinite, necessity and possibility.

Most adults, Kierkegaard writes, are good at keeping themselves in the
dark or prefer not to relate to their despair.[^ch01_61] And there are many
ways to do so, Kierkegaard explains. Through diversions, through work
and busyness, by latching on to certainties, conventions, convictions,
traditions. Or by living ordinary lives, and by externalizing
discomfort, rationalizing feelings of unrest.[^ch01_62] In *The Present Age*,
he argues that his time is an age of anticipators and the risk-averse,
everyone is given rules and calculators to aid one's thinking.[^ch01_63] In
an attempt to escape their despair, many people try to find safety and
security in living by the numbers. This is futile, Kierkegaard argues.
This philistine-bourgeois mentality thinks that it controls possibility,
that it has tricked this prodigious elasticity into the trap or madhouse
of probability, thinks that it holds its prisoner; it leads possibility
around imprisoned in the cage of probability, exhibits it, imagines
itself to be the master, does not perceive that precisely thereby it has
imprisoned itself in the thralldom of spiritlessness and is the most
wretched of all.[^ch01_64] Those who claim never to be anxious are
earthbound. Despite necessity, despite finitude, despite the
delimitations around living as gendered bodies, of a particular ethnic
and religious descent, within certain social-economic groups, within a
specific nation and at a certain time, and despite all the precautions
taken for safety and security, there remains the possible. I will return
to Kierkegaard’s understanding of the possible below.

In the next chapter, Chapter 2, I flesh out the concept of the
relational self and how it manifests into artistic masks and camouflage
wear. Algorithmic anxiety caused by facial recognition algorithms is
about both the radical openness toward the unknown and about algorithmic
regimes that attempt to ensnare this openness. The algorithmic capture
of the face conditions despair in part because the desire for
sovereignty, autonomy, and self-transparency is perceived as being
tarnished and inhibited by the capacities with which facial recognition
technology is associated. What is missing is a sense of possibility.
However, a Kierkegaardian reframing of the meaning of the mask and
camouflage might offer a response to what seems to be a lack of
possibility.

## Faith as the Limit of Knowledge 

Another central concept of anxiety has to do with Kierkegaard's distinct
understanding of the synthesis between faith and knowledge. Kierkegaard
critiques a kind of philosophy that extends its limits. For philosophy
to be faithful to its aim requires it to be aware of its limits. In *The
Concept of Anxiety,* Kierkegaard insists that a total system of
knowledge is impossible; one has to live on the basis of faith.[^ch01_65]
Philosophy can do no more than form conceptions of faith, but is not
equipped to understand or explain it fully, Kierkegaard insists.

To start with Kierkegaard's take on knowledge: central to his argument
is that we live our lives in relationship to things that we cannot ever
be knowledgeable about. A prime villain in Kierkegaard's writings is
all-embracing and all-explaining systems of thought and the arrogance of
a way of thinking that presumes any topic can be ‘grasped’ or ‘captured’
or ‘covered’ by knowledge. He rejects a kind of thinking that assumes
knowledge is cumulative or universal or that one can throw a great book
at any given problem or dilemma.[^ch01_66] It is not for him to reject
notions of objective knowledge wholesale. It may exist, but it is not
within reach of mortals. ‘There is a knowledge in the external world’,
he writes in *Fear and Trembling*, ‘that believes it is enough to know
what is great — no other work is needed. But for this reason it does not
get bread, it perishes while everything changes to gold’.[^ch01_67] According
to Kierkegaard, knowledge is of limited use when it comes to existence.
He insists that existence cannot be reduced to systematic explanations
or rationalizations; it cannot be explained or explained away. He
laments that people are enchanted by knowledge for the sake of
knowledge. They are immersed by facts, engrossed in books, contemplating
in abstraction, without relating this knowledge to themselves, to their
relation to others, or to the spiritual world, the unknown.

One thing we cannot be knowledgeable about is God. As mentioned earlier,
according to Kierkegaard we exist in relation to God. Kierkegaard’s God
is Christian. However, it is not some entity or bearded man somewhere up
on a cloud, nor is it an all-seeing judge. In his work, Kierkegaard uses
different terms to write about God, including (but not limited to)
‘absolute freedom’, ‘possibility’, ‘spirit’, ‘the god’, ‘faith’, and
‘the unknown’. Some of his more devout Christian pseudonymous personas
might be Vigilius Haufniensis in *The Concept of Anxiety,* or
Anti-Climacus in *The Sickness unto Death.* While one of his most
semi-religious pseudonymous personas might be Johannes Climacus, the
author of *Philosophical Fragments*. In discussing the unknown he
writes, ‘the ultimate paradox of thought: to want to discover something
that thought itself cannot think’.[^ch01_68] This is similar to his writings
on faith and the possible, to which I will return below. Kierkegaard
continues:

> But what is this unknown against which the understanding in its
> paradoxical passion collides and which even disturbs man and his
> self-knowledge? It is the unknown. But it is not a human being,
> insofar as he knows man, or anything else that he knows. Therefore,
> let us call this unknown the god. It is only a name we give to
> it.[^ch01_69]

It is clear that Kierkegaard’s conception of the unknown, of the limits
of knowledge, is different from a normative understanding of the unknown
as that which is ‘not known’, a ‘known negative’, a ‘known unknown’ or a
case of ‘insufficient knowledge’. A.D.C. Cake explains that the unknown
as Kierkegaard conceives it ‘cannot fall under the auspices of
understanding’.[^ch01_70] The unknown forms the incentive and torment of
understanding as it forms the frontier, the boundary of human knowledge
— of thought itself. The unknown, as Kierkegaard conceptualizes it,
cannot ever be known or grasped, as understanding cannot transcend
itself. As Cake puts it:

> \[T\]he understanding and the unknown are at odds in such a way that
> where the understanding advances, the unknown recedes; as the
> understanding seeks to subject the unknown to its established
> categories, the unknown remains indefinable. \[…\] The understanding’s
> paradoxical passion is thus the irresistible urge to subject the
> unknown to its own standard of truth, which is impossible.[^ch01_71]

One cannot describe in human terms what transcends the earthly,
Kierkegaard argues. Before continuing, I want to propose an agnostic
reading of Kierkegaard's Christian god and interpret the unknown as
unknowable abstractions to which we stand in relation but do not have
access to or knowledge of. From an agnostic perspective, what we stand
in relation to cannot fully be covered by knowledge. Sure, we are
grounded in and limited by necessity, determined by all kinds of social
forces, and yes there is causality, but there might be dimensions that
defy determinism and causation and that nonetheless affect us, perhaps
even fundamentally.

For Kierkegaard, the limits of knowledge are formed by what transcends
the earthly, which is faith. To live with faith is to open up to the
presence of things outside of the thinkable, a relating to what
transcends the earthly and the self, but what is nonetheless fundamental
to human existence.[^ch01_72] To live with faith requires to give up on the
pretense that science can explain everything.[^ch01_73] Faith is not a
theoretical construct. It is not something that can be understood by
intellectual pursuit. Importantly, neither is it the result of carefully
followed Biblical instructions or saying grace on Sunday visits to some
church. In *Fear and Trembling,* Kierkegaard writes about the relation
between faith and knowledge. Faith, he argues, flourishes in the impasse
of not-knowing. To have faith requires the ability to relate to that
which the eye cannot see and reason and logic cannot fathom. In *The
Concept of Anxiety*, Kierkegaard describes faith as that ‘which no
science has explained and which no science can explain’.[^ch01_74] When it
comes to understanding existence, we depend on faith, Kierkegaard
argues. Importantly, faith conditions the possible, without faith no
possibility. I will return this in the next section.

‘What does this synthesis of faith and knowledge mean for Truth?’, you
may ask. It would be hyperbolic to say this comes down to relativism or
subjectivism or skepticism. The truth may not be attainable, but what
Kierkegaard offers in return is subjective truth, a truth that is true
for you, or what he describes as ‘the truth of appropriation’.[^ch01_75]
Subjective truth is an idea or value you should be willing to commit
your life to. Thus, subjective truth does not preclude strong,
passionate convictions. However, subjective truth is haunted by its own
limits, by uncertainty and the unknown. Subjective truth will always
remain an ‘objective uncertainty’ as it is never granted that status of
a fact or Truth. Therefore, to choose to commit to a subjective truth is
a risky business, giving rise to anxiety, and takes courage,
perseverance, and imagination. Kierkegaard:

> Without risk, no faith […] If I am able to apprehend God objectively, I
> do not have faith; but because I cannot do this, I must have faith. If
> I want to keep myself in faith, I must continually see to it that I
> hold fast the objective uncertainty, see to it that in the objective
> uncertainty I am “out on 70,000 fathoms of water” and still have
> faith.[^ch01_76]

Chapter 3 zooms in on artistic representations of algorithmic trading on
the financial markets. Engagements with trading algorithms, broadly
speaking, fall into two categories. In the first, trading algorithms are
imagined as ungraspable structures with divine-like foreknowledge and
power, inaccessible to mortals and human understanding. Algorithmic
anxiety in relation to such an understanding of trading algorithms is
similar to fears of God's wrath. In the second, the emphasis is given to
the limits of algorithmic knowledge production and focus shifts to that
which cannot be calculated, predicted or anticipated. In Chapter 3, I
discuss different artworks that explore what may become possible when
one lives in relationship to things that we cannot gain knowledge of.

Finally, Chapter 4 engages with algorithmic anxiety in relation to
search engine algorithms. Anxieties of this kind are conditioned by an
awareness of the limits of knowledge. The chapter primarily focuses on
one artist whose work could be regarded as a contemporary response to
living with faith, more generally; and to how the commitment to a
subjective truth might take shape in relation to algorithmic knowledge
production, more specifically.

## The Possible as Movement, as the Antidote to Anxiety and Stand-still

Perhaps the red thread in Kierkegaard's conception of anxiety and, by
extension, in his conception of the self as a relational being and his
conception of faith, is a profound reflection on the conditions — and
importantly *not the causes* — under which change becomes possible. That
is the conditions under which the possible becomes possible. The concept
of the possible — and other terms with which Kierkegaard refers to it,
‘absolute freedom’, ‘God’, ‘infinity’ — is central to his conception of
anxiety and is interlinked with his epistemology of the self and his
ontology of knowledge. In *The Concept of Anxiety,* Kierkegaard
describes the possible as an event, an unexpected moment, and he
associates it in *Fear and Trembling* with the ‘absurd’[^ch01_77] and in *The
Concept of Anxiety* with ‘the suddenness of the enigmatic’.[^ch01_78]

However, although everything is possible in the possible, not everyone
is aware of it. In *The Sickness unto Death,* Kierkegaard assumes that
fatalists, determinists and those who he calls ‘philistine-bourgeois’
lack awareness of possibility. For these people everything has become
necessary and trivial, which means they live in deeply sunk in
finitude.[^ch01_79] As mentioned earlier, the self, as a process of becoming,
is a synthesis of possibility and necessity, the finite and the
infinite.[^ch01_80] Kierkegaard likens this synthesis to breathing. You need
to both inhale and exhale to stay alive. The fatalist, determinist, or
the philistine, he argues, cannot breathe, ‘for it is impossible to
breathe necessity exclusively, because that would utterly suffocate a
person’s self. \[P\]ossibility is for the self what oxygen is for
breathing’.[^ch01_81] And just as inhaling alone or exhaling alone cannot be
the condition for breathing, so too possibility alone or necessity alone
can no more be the condition for existing. The possible needs to be
grounded in necessity. The possible is about thinking possibility and
necessity at the same time; it is about thinking and doing the actual
and the virtual at once.

This is not an easy task. It is a process of ‘continual movement on the
spot’, to use Kierkegaard’s phrase. The outcome of this process is
uncertain, as the possible defies laws of calculation and causation. It
is not something that can be produced, mobilized, or spoken into
existence. In *Fear and Trembling* he writes:

> From the external and visible work there comes as old adage: “Only one
> who works gets bread”. Oddly enough, the adage does not fit the world
> in which it is most at home, for imperfection is the fundamental law
> of the external world, and here it happens again and again that he who
> does not work does get bread, and he who sleeps gets even more
> abundantly than he who works.[^ch01_82]

The idea that if you do good, the good of the possible will come to you
is a falsity, according to Kierkegaard. Some people work their socks
off, are exploited, and have no bread to eat. Others do not do a stroke
of work and have their bellies full of bread. For the possible
everything is equally possible, which is why the possible inspires
anxiety. Anxiety concerns the possible of the possible.

To explain the possible, in *Fear and Trembling* Kierkegaard
metaphorically stages a ballet dancer. He says: ‘\[I\]t is supposed to
be the most difficult feat for a ballet dancer to leap into a specific
posture in such a way that he never once strains for the posture but in
the very leap assumes the posture’.[^ch01_83] By assuming the posture he
never once strained for, the dancer makes ‘the movement of faith’.[^ch01_84]
The idea is that one orients one’s thinking, being and acting to an
ideal, even though this ideal may very well be unreachable. To relate to
the possible is a recognition of how things are *and* a recognition that
things could be and should be otherwise, even if they won't be
otherwise. The ideal ought to be realizable, but may not be realizable;
by assuming it, one resigns to its possibility. This happens ‘by virtue
of the absurd, for human calculation is out of the question’,
Kierkegaard insists.[^ch01_85] By calling such an event absurd, he emphasizes
that it is qualitatively different from knowledge and that it is not
identical with the improbable, the unexpected, or the unforeseen.[^ch01_86]
It also stresses his point that there is *no causality* between really
wanting something and working your fingers to your bones and achieving
what you want. A similar logic can be found in his writings about the
exception. The exception, Kierkegaard writes in *Repetition* (1843),
cannot bypass the universal but ‘battles through it’.[^ch01_87] It is an
absurd and paradoxical simultaneity of the universal and the particular,
of the immanent in the transcendent — a movement of infinity in a finite
world.

Movement is central to Kierkegaard's conception of the possible and to
his thinking in general. In Kierkegaard's work, movement is often
expressed with notions such as ‘the leap of faith’, the ‘movement of
infinity’, ‘battling through’ and the ‘step into’. It is not a linear or
progressive movement he has in mind. Movement, as he understands it,
does not have an address or destination. Movement at the spot,
Kierkegaard explains, ‘neither moves from the place where it is nor
arrives anywhere’.[^ch01_88]

In *The Concept of Anxiety,* Kierkegaard describes this synthesis as
follows:

> The eternal is \[…\] the present. \[The eternal\] is a going on that
> never moves from the spot, since for our powers of representation, the
> eternal is the infinitely contentful present. In the eternal, there is
> again no division to be found into past and future, because the
> present is posited as the annulled succession.[^ch01_89]

His idiosyncratic conception of movement at the spot is not, of course,
merely a theoretical construct. Moving, or walking to be more precise,
was essential to the way he *lived* his philosophy, too, both as a
tribute to his great inspiration, Socrates, and crucially as a way to
avoid stagnation or paralysis in his thinking-as-being. In a letter to
his deeply depressed sister-in-law he writes: ‘Above all, do not lose
your desire to walk \[…\] Every day I walk myself into a state of
well-being and walk away from every illness; I have walked myself into
my best thoughts, and I know of no thought so burdensome that one cannot
walk away from it.’[^ch01_90]

Kierkegaard associates movement with passion, with becoming inspired, or
with being motivated. With passion, with inspiration and elation, an
opening may occur, an opening to the possible. To an extent, movement at
the spot is a principle against succumbing to necessity — and for living
with possibility. It is what keeps the endless human endeavor going on.
In the final chapter, Chapter 5, movement at the spot will be reframed
as a creative and productive form of living through algorithmic anxiety.
In that chapter, the central motifs and concepts of the artistic
representations discussed in the previous chapters — masks and
camouflage (Chapter 2); hybrids and specters (Chapter 3); collectors and
collections (Chapter 4) — will be interpreted as figures of movement at
the spot that represent a synthesis between possibility and necessity
and that each in their own way present different ways to relate to the
possible in order to live through algorithmic anxiety.

## Towards a Conception of Algorithmic Anxiety as a Relation to the Possible

We might be entangled with, but we are not tied to algorithms. Artistic
engagements with algorithms have often been interpreted as expressions
of concerns about algorithmic governance, algorithmic opacity, and
algorithmic selves. Algorithmic anxiety should be understood as a lack
of movement, a dwelling in and an overemphasis of one side of the
relation between the finite and the infinite and possibility and
necessity. It is about the possible of algorithmic culture; what
algorithms might do, what they might become, and the position the self
occupies in relation. However, algorithmic anxiety is not a sentimental
subjectivity, nor a personal pathology related to one’s feelings
regarding algorithms. It concerns the possible of the entanglement
between the social and algorithmic technologies. Despair about the
future possibilities of algorithmic culture arises predominantly when
the narrow and converging aspects of algorithmic culture are
over-emphasized, and this happens when the possible self is perceived to
be circumscribed, bounded, and governed by algorithmic regimes. The
finite aspects of algorithmic culture are then over-coded and the
relations around which the self, the structures of actuality, and the
production of knowledge cohere and are then imagined to be predominantly
produced and constrained by the algorithmic. Despair about the future of
the self in algorithmic culture may also be conditioned by the
over-emphasizing and over-coding of the infinite and the possible, up to
the point that is has lost its footing in necessity. This happens, for
example, with a type of thinking in which the algorithmic technologies
of advanced capitalism are mystified, depoliticized, or imagined as
having infinite and god-like powers.

The starting point for the development of the concept of algorithmic
anxiety is the suggestion that anxiety about algorithms lacks grounding
in either possibility or necessity and requires imagination. Imagination
is key here. Imagination does not preclude reason, logic, or the finite,
but it may break open algorithmic determinism, fatalism, cynicism, and
nihilism, opening up to possibility. Imagination, as Kierkegaard puts
it, ‘is not a capacity, as are the others — if one wishes to speak in
those terms, it is the capacity *instar omnium* \[for all
capacities\]’.[^ch01_91] As such, algorithmic anxiety also provides the
opportunity to open up to alternative imaginations. And imagination can
take many forms — such as faith, passion, and movement at the spot,
which all condition the possible. It is not about *this* or *that*
utopian vision of the future of algorithmic culture. Instead, it is
about imagining the conditions for change, imagining movement in a
situation of experienced stand-still and constriction. Imagination as
the condition for movement at the spot is here understood as relying on
a sense of possibility, beyond what is given in the algorithmic present.
It is about extending the present.

Which is to say, the Achilles’ heel of algorithmic anxiety is not ‘the
algorithm’ per se, but the ‘finitizing’ of the infinite. Algorithmic
anxiety requires a response and this response signals one’s relationship
to the extending constituents of the self, actuality and knowledge — to
the possible. This is the paradox of algorithmic anxiety: it is the
*un*-algorithmic which conditions possibility within the algorithmic.
The task is to engage with what conditions the possible, but in relation
to and grounded in necessity. The possible is conditioned by imagining
‘movement in that place’, and ‘that place’ is algorithmic culture.[^ch01_92]

A few intriguing contemporary artworks that underline the interrelation
and overlap between the confining and extending aspects of the self,
actuality and knowledge emblematize this kind of ‘movement’ in
algorithmic culture. In these artworks, an articulation of movement at
the spot arises in the form of masks and camouflage (Chapter 2), of
specters and deities (Chapter 3), and collectors and collections
(Chapter 4). This articulation shows practices that are conducive to
living with algorithmic anxiety. These works take different positions in
relation, on the one hand, to the radical openness of the self,
knowledge and actuality; *and,* on the other, to the rigid algorithmic
regimes that attempt to circumscribe this openness in the interest of
profit and control. These different stances are not fixed nor given, but
dynamic, relational, uneven, interdependent and context-dependent,
pointing to the many contradictory relations within algorithmic culture
and opening it up to alternative imaginations that move towards
algorithmic possibility.

[^ch01_1]: Diakopolous, *Algorithmic Accountability Reporting*, 2.

[^ch01_2]: O'Neil, *Weapons of Math Destruction,* 13.

[^ch01_3]: O'Neil, *Weapons of Math Destruction,* 11.

[^ch01_4]: O'Neil, *Weapons of Math Destruction,* 31.

[^ch01_5]: A. Rouvroy, and T. Berns, ‘Algorithmic Governmentality and
    Prospects of Emancipation: Disparateness as a precondition for
    individuation through relationships?’, translated by E. Libbrecht,
    2013,
    https://www.cairn-int.info/article-E\_RES\_177\_0163--algorithmic-governmentality-and-prospect.htm,
    10.

[^ch01_6]: Rouvroy and Berns, ‘Algorithmic Governmentality and Prospects of
    Emancipation, 10.

[^ch01_7]: Rouvroy and Berns, ‘Algorithmic Governmentality and Prospects of
    Emancipation, 25.

[^ch01_8]: Cheney-Lippold, *We Are Data,* 5.

[^ch01_9]: M. Pasquinelli, ‘The Spike: On the Growth and Form of Pattern
    Police’, in *Nervous Systems: Quantified Life and the Social
    Question*, edited by A. Franke, S. Hankey, and M. Tuszynski,
    Leipzig: Specter Books, 2016, 288)

[^ch01_10]: T. Gillespie, ‘Algorithm’, in *Digital Keywords: A Vocabulary of
    Information Society and Culture*, edited by B. Peters, Princeton:
    Princeton University Press, 2016, 27.

[^ch01_11]: Cheney-Lippold, *We Are Data,* 6.

[^ch01_12]: Cheney-Lippold, *We Are Data,* 6.

[^ch01_13]: Cheney-Lippold, *We Are Data,* 4.

[^ch01_14]: S. Milan, ‘\#hackeverything: Everyday Life and Politics in the
    Computational Theocracy’, in *Hacking Habitat: Art of Control: Arts
    Technology and Social Change,* edited by I. Gevers, Rotterdam:
    NAI010 Publishers, 2015, 22.

[^ch01_15]: Milan, ‘\#hackeverything’, 22.

[^ch01_16]: A. Morris, ‘Whoever, Whatever: On Anonymity as Resistance to
    Empire’, *Parallax*, 18.4 (2012), 107.

[^ch01_17]: Morris, ‘Whoever, Whatever’, 107.

[^ch01_18]: T. Gillespie, ‘The Relevance of Algorithms’ in *Media
    Technologies: Essays on Communication, Materiality, and Society*,
    edited by T. Gillespie, P.J. Boczkowski and A.K. Foot, Cambridge:
    the MIT Press, 2014,
    http://www.tarletongillespie.org/essays/Gillespie%20-%20The%20Relevance%20of%20Algorithms.pdf.

[^ch01_19]: A. Franke, S. Hankey, and M. Tuszynski (eds) *Nervous Systems:
    Quantified Life and the Social Question*, Leipzig: Specter Books,
    2016, 14-22.

[^ch01_20]: Franke, Hankey, and Tuszynski, *Nervous Systems*, 11-13.

[^ch01_21]: Pasquinelli, ‘The Spike’, 281.

[^ch01_22]: M. Willson, ‘Algorithms (and the) Everyday’, *Information,
    Communication & Society*, 20.1 (2016), 140.

[^ch01_23]: F. Pasquale, *The Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms that
    Control Money and Information,* London and Cambridge: Harvard
    University Press, 2015, 83.

[^ch01_24]: F. Pasquale, *The Black Box Society: The Secret Algorithms that
    Control Money and Information,* London and Cambridge: Harvard
    University Press, 2015, 9.

[^ch01_25]: Pasquale, *The Black Box Society,* 141.

[^ch01_26]: Pasquale, *The Black Box Society,* 5.

[^ch01_27]: J. Burrell, ‘How the Machine “Thinks”: Understanding Opacity in
    Machine Learning Algorithms’, *Big Data & Society* (2016), 4.

[^ch01_28]: Burrell, ‘How the Machine “Thinks”’, 5.

[^ch01_29]: Burrell, ‘How the Machine “Thinks”’, 2.

[^ch01_30]: Burrell, ‘How the Machine “Thinks”’, 5. That is to say, models
    for machine learning are developed in line with how algorithms
    process data, without regard for human comprehension. They are not
    legible to humans as the scale required to apply them makes them
    illegible to humans. On June 15, 2017, *The Atlantic* published an
    article titled ‘An Artificial Intelligence Developed Its Own
    Non-Human Language’. The piece reports about a paper, published by
    researchers at Facebook Artificial Intelligence Research Lab, on an
    experiment it ran to train chatbots to negotiate with one another.
    The researchers at Facebook used a large dataset of human-human
    negotiations that ran on machine learning algorithms used to train
    chat-bots with the communication and reasoning skills required to
    negotiate with other chat-bots. Over time, however, the bots started
    to negotiate with each other, but they did so in a language
    incomprehensible to the researchers involved. The article went
    viral.

[^ch01_31]: C. Steiner, *Automate This: How Algorithms Came to Rule Our
    World*, New York, NY: Penguin Group, 2012, 18.

[^ch01_32]: Steiner, *Automate This*, 18.

[^ch01_33]: Steiner, *Automate This*, 19.

[^ch01_34]: Steiner, *Automate This*, 419.

[^ch01_35]: S. Cave, ‘Intelligence: A History’*, Aeon*, 2017,
    https://aeon.co/essays/on-the-dark-history-of-intelligence-as-domination.

[^ch01_36]: Cave, ‘Intelligence: A History’.

[^ch01_37]: Not all scholars consider algorithmic culture to be a
    cause of concern. Some academics muse optimistically about the
    algorithmic replacement of human labour and envision scenarios of
    happy post-work co-existence. On this end of the spectrum, we find
    the work of, amongst others, Pedro Domingos. In his *The Master
    Algorithm: How the Quest for the Ultimate Learning Machine Will
    Remake our World* (2015), Domingos foreshadows that the line between
    ‘automatable and non-automatable jobs’ will drastically change. (p.
    278). He assumes that soon there will be a robot in every household,
    running all quotidian chores, perhaps even looking after children
    and pets while you are seeking self-actualisation in a post-work
    world. How soon this will happen ‘depends on how hard finding the
    Master Algorithm turns out to be’, he writes (p. 42). Domingos: ‘For
    those of us not working, life will not be meaningless \[…\] People
    will seek meaning in human relationships, self-actualization, and
    spirituality, much as they do now. The need to earn a living will be
    a distant memory, another piece of humanity's barbaric past that we
    rose above’ (p. 279).

[^ch01_38]: C.S. Evans, *Kierkegaard: An Introduction*, Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 2009, 30.

[^ch01_39]: Translated by Kierkegaard scholar Bruce Kirmmse as ‘step into
    character’. Kierkegaard's oeuvre could be considered a series of
    steps into different characters; each pseudonym takes on a different
    character that relates in its own way to the central concepts in his
    work. Thus, there is no conclusive answer to what these concepts
    mean because they are thought out and acted out in different and
    often contradictory ways and fail intentionally to provide closure.

[^ch01_40]: Evans, *Kierkegaard*, 29.

[^ch01_41]: S. Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death: A Christian
    Psychological Exposition for Upbuilding and Awakening*, translated
    and edited by H.V. Hong and E.H. Hong, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press, 1983(1849), 13.

[^ch01_42]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 29-30.

[^ch01_43]: S. Kierkegaard, *Either/Or: A Fragment of Life*, translated by A.
    Hannay, edited by V. Eremita, New York: Penguin Books, 2004(1843),
    404.

[^ch01_44]: Kierkegaard, *Either/Or*, 392.

[^ch01_45]: Kierkegaard, *Either/Or*, 393.

[^ch01_46]: Kierkegaard, *Either/Or*, 392.

[^ch01_47]: Kierkegaard, *Either/Or*, 393.

[^ch01_48]: S. Kierkegaard, *Concluding Unscientific Postscript to
    Philosophical Fragments,* Vol. 1, edited and translated by H.V. Hong
    and E.H. Hong, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
    1992(1846), 680.

[^ch01_49]: Evans, *Kierkegaard*, 48-50.

[^ch01_50]: S. Kierkegaard, *The Concept of Anxiety: A Simple Psychologically
    Oriented Deliberation in View of The Dogmatic Problem of Hereditary
    Sin*, edited and translated by A. Hannay, New York, NY: Liveright
    Publishing Company, 2014(1844), 68-69.

[^ch01_51]: Kierkegaard, *The Concept of Anxiety,* 256.

[^ch01_52]: Kierkegaard, *Concluding Unscientific Postscript,* 182.

[^ch01_53]: Kierkegaard, *Concluding Unscientific Postscript,* 182.

[^ch01_54]: Kierkegaard, *Concluding Unscientific Postscript,* 182.

[^ch01_55]: Howard, as cited in G.R. Beabout, *Kierkegaard on Anxiety and
    Despair: An analysis of The Concept of Anxiety and The Sickness unto
    Death,* Ph.D. Thesis., Ann Arbor: Marquette University, 1988,
    https://philpapers.org/rec/BEAKOA.

[^ch01_56]: Beabout, *Kierkegaard on Anxiety and Despair.*

[^ch01_57]: Kierkegaard, *The Concept of Anxiety,* 257.

[^ch01_58]: Kierkegaard, *The Concept of Anxiety,* 94-96.

[^ch01_59]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 30-42.

[^ch01_60]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 36.

[^ch01_61]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 48.

[^ch01_62]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 48.

[^ch01_63]: Kierkegaard, *The Present Age,* 33-35.

[^ch01_64]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 41-42.

[^ch01_65]: Kierkegaard, *The Concept of Anxiety,* 176.

[^ch01_66]: Kierkegaard argues in *Concluding Unscientific Postscript*:
    ‘Knowledge \[of the historical\] merely assists one into an illusion
    that is infatuated with the palpably material. What is that which I
    know historically? It is the palpably material. Ideality I know by
    myself, and if I do not know it by myself, then I do not know it at
    all, and all the historical knowledge does not help. Ideality is not
    a chattel that can be transferred from one person to another, or
    something thrown in to boot when the purchase is a large one. If I
    know that Caesar was great, then I know what the great is, and this
    is what I see — otherwise I do not know that Caesar was great.
    History’s account — that reliable men assure us of it, that there is
    no risk involved in accepting this opinion since it must be obvious
    that he was a great man, that the outcome demonstrates it — does not
    help at all. To believe the ideality on the word of another is like
    laughing at a joke not because one has understood it but because
    someone else said that it was funny’ Kierkegaard, *The Concept of
    Anxiety,* 706-707.

[^ch01_67]: S. Kierkegaard, *Fear and Trembling/Repetition*, translated and
    edited by H.V. Hong and E.H. Hong, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press, 1983(1843), 27-28.

[^ch01_68]: S. Kierkegaard, *Philosophical Fragments,* translated and edited
    by H.V. Hong and E.H. Hong,Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
    Press, 1985(1844), 106.

[^ch01_69]: Kierkegaard, *Philosophical Fragments*, 107, italics in original.

[^ch01_70]: A.D.C. Cake, ‘Thinking the Unknown: Kierkegaard’s Climacus and
    the Absolute Paradox of Understanding’, *Analecta Hermeneutica*, 2
    (2010):
    https://journals.library.mun.ca/ojs/index.php/analecta/article/view/162/105.

[^ch01_71]: Cake, ‘Thinking the Unknown’.

[^ch01_72]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death,* 38.

[^ch01_73]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death,* 38.

[^ch01_74]: Kierkegaard, *The Concept of Anxiety,* 116.

[^ch01_75]: Kierkegaard, *Concluding Unscientific Postscript,* 41.

[^ch01_76]: Kierkegaard, *Concluding Unscientific Postscript,* 435.

[^ch01_77]: Kierkegaard, *Fear and Trembling,* 46.

[^ch01_78]: Kierkegaard, *The Concept of Anxiety,* 71.

[^ch01_79]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 40.

[^ch01_80]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 40.

[^ch01_81]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 40.

[^ch01_82]: Kierkegaard, *Fear and Trembling,* 27.

[^ch01_83]: Kierkegaard, *Fear and Trembling,* 41.

[^ch01_84]: Kierkegaard, *Fear and Trembling,* 34.

[^ch01_85]: Kierkegaard, *Fear and Trembling,* 46.

[^ch01_86]: Kierkegaard, *Fear and Trembling,* 47.

[^ch01_87]: S. Kierkegaard, *Fear and Trembling/Repetition*, translated and
    edited by H.V. Hong and E.H. Hong, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
    University Press, 1983(1843), 226.

[^ch01_88]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 36.

[^ch01_89]: Kierkegaard, *The Concept of Anxiety,* 152, italics mine.

[^ch01_90]: Kierkegaard as cited in B.H. Kirmmse, ‘Introduction: Letting
    Nature Point beyond Nature’, in S. Kierkegaard*, The Lily of the
    Field and the Bird of the Air: Three Godly Discourses*, Princeton,
    NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018, xvii-xviii.

[^ch01_91]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 30-31.

[^ch01_92]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death,* 36.
