---
Pr-id: Algorithmic Anxiety: A Kierkegaardian Inquiry into the Imaginary of Possibility
P-id: Theory on Demand
A-id: 32
Type: article
Book-type: anthology
Anthology item: article
Item-id: 02
Article-title: Conclusion
Article-status: accepted
Author: Patricia de Vries
Rights: CC BY-NC 4.0
...


# Conclusion: From Algorithmic Anxiety to Algorithmic Possibility, or Movement at the Spot 

> Despair is the absolute extreme of self-love.
> It is reached when a person 
> deliberately turns his back on all help from anyone else 
> in order to taste the rotten luxury 
> of knowing himself to be lost.
>
> — Thomas Merton, *Seeds*

## Introduction

In this concluding chapter, I recapitulate and tease out the major ideas
of the preceding chapters. At the start of this book, I introduced
present-day anxieties braided around the entwinement of the social and
the algorithmic. Algorithmic culture has evoked anxieties that are
symptomatic of its logic of automation, optimization, accumulation, and
exploitation. I observed that the proliferation of, in particular, the
mechanics, apparatuses, and infrastructures of facial recognition
algorithms, trading algorithms, and search algorithms had drawn the
attention and concern of a growing group of contemporary artists over
the past decade. What I have referred to as algorithmic anxiety was
framed as an extension of Kierkegaard’s distinctive concept of anxiety
mapped onto prominent contemporary artworks that engage explicitly with
facial recognition, trading algorithms, and search algorithms.

In Chapters 2-4, I fleshed out the concept of algorithmic anxiety
through the analysis of a range of popular and prominent contemporary
artworks that explicitly tackle concerns about the algorithmic capture
of the face (Chapter 2), automated trading on the financial markets
(Chapter 3), and algorithmic mediation of web search (Chapter 4). In
line with Kierkegaard’s conception of anxiety, I have described
algorithmic anxiety as a relational synthesis between confining and
extending constituents of the self, actuality, and knowledge, of which
the finite, necessity, and temporality are confining and the infinite,
possibility, and the eternal the extending constituents. Put simply,
where necessity converges, possibility diverges. Algorithmic anxiety
happens when one side of the reciprocal relation is overlooked,
underdeveloped, or ignored. It is conditioned by a sense of being
entangled within a system within which you cannot freely move and within
which you experience a lack of power and resources to climb out of.

The question that algorithmic anxiety poses is one of positioning: it is
a matter of relating to the possible while simultaneously accounting for
necessity. What resonates in the majority of artistic portrayals is an
emphasis on necessity, on the converging aspects of the self, the
structures of actuality, and the production of knowledge in algorithmic
culture. Further, algorithmic anxiety represents a desire to move away
from centralized powers and central mediators, and a desire for changes
in the distribution of resources, political power and information, as
well as a desire for more participatory and inclusive forms of
government. It gets to the ways that algorithms, in part intended to
reduce and control the anxieties around the incomprehensibility and
unpredictability of social reality, instead refashion anxieties they
purport to manage.

A few intriguing contemporary artworks frame algorithmic anxiety as the
relation between, on the one hand, the radical openness of the self,
knowledge and actuality, *and*, on the other hand, the rigid algorithmic
regimes that attempt to circumscribe this openness. In these works,
algorithmic anxiety provides the opportunity to relate to the extending
aspects of self, the structures of actuality, and the production of
knowledge.

Here, artists do not merely reflect on the experienced anxieties about
algorithmic culture, but also re-imagine the entanglement of the social
and the algorithmic pointing to alternative relations of entanglement.
In various ways masks (Chapter 2), specters (Chapter 3) and collectors
(Chapter 4) represent alternative ways of relating to algorithmic
culture. The artistic portrayals of these ambiguous motifs point to or
hint at where there might be room to maneuver, where cracks and fissures
appear. The relational conceptualization of masks (Chapter 2), specters
(Chapter 3) and collectors (Chapter 4) developed in the book’s analyses
of artworks hints at conditions that could make changes in the
entanglement of the social and the algorithmic possible by tacitly but
poignantly pointing to bottom-up, smaller-scale and collective and
participatory movements that allow for different ways of relating. These
different forms of relating, these movements, take the form of syntheses
between individual independence and collective interdependence, between
opening up and cracking up, and between means and ends.

## 

## Capturing the Face Anxiety and the Possible of the Multiple Self 

In the first case study in Chapter 2, I approached algorithmic anxiety
by assessing works by three contemporary artists — Zach Blas, Adam
Harvey and Sterling Crispin — all of whom have responded to recognition
algorithms with masks and camouflage techniques designed as a means to
disrupt and critique the perceived proliferation and threat of facial
recognition devices and practices. The algorithmic capture of the face
causes anxiety partly because the desire for sovereignty, immunity,
autonomy, and self-transparency is perceived as tarnished and inhibited
by the potentialities facial recognition technology is associated with,
namely: to police, inspect, nudge, and oppress. The logic and practices
that manifest itself through facial recognition technology are perceived
to pose the risk, to individuals and groups in society, to become a tool
for those in whose service facial recognition technologies operate.
Unable to know the future and see what that risk may entail, artists
imagine what the future may bring forth, and share a tendency to hold on
to what one is afraid to lose and believes to possess in the present:
autonomy, privacy, sovereignty.

Masks and camouflage offer symbolic and practices of resistance to these
posed threats. The prevalence of masks and camouflage in contemporary
art as a response to facial recognition algorithms builds on a
historical tradition of facial concealment as well as on black-boxing
strategies used by political protest movements, in civil conflict, and
(guerrilla) war. By exploiting the weaknesses in recognition technology,
face masks and camouflage do not merely represent a subversive hacking
of facial recognition technology. Beyond this, face masks and camouflage
offer movement, and movement comprises more than the fading-in-of- and
fading-out-of-sight of facial recognition technologies.

Algorithmic anxiety in the face of facial recognition systems is shaped
by the desire for something that is perceived as hampered or at risk.
Desires, of different people in different contexts and situations,
cannot be separated from gender, ethnicity, geographic location,
abilities and aspects of one's socio-political or economic habitat. A
close reading of masks and camouflage practices indicates a desire to
belong, to community and solidarity, a desire to be recognized and seen,
as well as a desire to withdraw, depersonalize, and hide in the masses.
Face masks and camouflage as strategies of hiding, withdrawing and
depersonalizing, cannot be separated from the desire to be seen and
belong. Algorithmic anxiety evoked by facial recognition technology is
the dynamic between the desire to be acknowledged, valued, recognized,
and included *and* the fear of being objectified, denied, excluded, and
disregarded; between the desire to be autonomous and independent *and*
the fears that the inability to be such evokes. The work of Blas,
Harvey, and Crispin show that relationality always involves risks, the
risk of being judged, exposed, objectified.

Masks and camouflage emblematize the grip algorithmic facial capture
technologies have on the self and offer an intervention in this tension
field by allowing for a reorganization of an experienced power imbalance
and precariousness. Crispin fears that algorithmic facial capture and
the profit-driven data it produces will become a dominant way of
assembling and imagining people. However, his *Data Masks* suggests that
this model is forced upon social reality, but is not reality itself. The
gap between the two is a space of possibility, symbolized by covering
the face as the desire for a space to cover. Further, the face masks of
Blas and Harvey's camouflage print suggests that though much importance
is often given to the autonomous, self-contained, self-organising
person, facial recognition technology's grip might be loosened by way of
moving towards collectivity, collaboration, community work, and
solidarity.

Masks and camouflage are not tools to resolve algorithmic anxiety. Over
and beyond an intervention into facial recognition technology, the face
masks and camouflage couture of Blas, Harvey and Crispin could be
considered as stylized performances of the embodied, situated, and
relational self. Rather than pointing to the vulnerability of the self
and its relation to others, masks and camouflage point to different
forms of being and relating such as interdependency, community,
collectivity, among others.

Masks and camouflage symbolize the possibility to maneuver vis-à-vis
algorithmic capture and circumscription by multiplying and strengthening
one's connections to and engagements with others.

## 

## Black Box Anxiety and the Possible of System Collapse 

The possible took on quite a different face in relation to automated
trading. The second case study, described in Chapter 3, was dedicated to
a close reading of algorithmic anxieties caused by trading algorithms.
Algorithmic trading causes anxiety in part because the infrastructure of
trading algorithms is conceived as an impenetrable black box, outside of
human reach and influence. Flash crashes and volatility on the financial
markets are imagined as the effect of these ever-faster, invisible,
complex, and unruly trading algorithms that work in inscrutable ways and
merely in the interest of their proprietors. In response, some artists
have taken to visualizing parts of the black box of finance. The
rendering-visible of the infrastructure of the black box of finance is
perceived as key to opening it up. There is a shared focus on wires,
cables, electronics, modems, screens, as well as on data centers and
bricks and mortar. Noticeable, too, is an emphasis on the output of
algorithmic processes in the form of representations of machine vision
and visualizations of algorithmic patterns of calculation. Algorithmic
failures and vulnerabilities in the form of flash crashes or breakdown
are a shared point of reference, too. Algorithmic anxiety is here evoked
by the imaginary of trading algorithms as a black box, a separate world
unconcerned with anything other than capital accumulation and profit
maximization, and the perceived lack of effect or bearing upon the
operations of the black box of finance.

However, some artists imagine the black box of finance as not merely the
result of developments in and characteristics of algorithmic trading.
The artistic engagement with trading algorithms of Femke Herregraven and
Emma Charles points to the spectral condition of the black box of
finance. This spectral relation lies therein that the black box of
finance is portrayed as produced through a *synthesis* between a wide
range of — seemingly oppositional — market actors and facets: past and
present; visible and invisible; material and immaterial; regulators and
operators; local and global; human and machine. In their work, the
spectral symbolizes the ambiguous relations that constitute the black
box of finance which defy rationalization, systematization, and
prediction. In their respective artworks, the spectral is figured by a
flood, the suggestion of a ghost or hybrid in the black box of finance,
and by God-like powers represented by a rapidly rotating column of wind
inside of a trading room. As water and wind, the spectral is formless
and makes its way through cracks and around obstacles.

Herregraven and Charles reimagine the black box of finance as
penetrable, changeable. A flood or a prodigious whirlwind can be
described as interventions which, in the words of Jack Halberstam, ‘do
not seek to make life better under the current conditions of
exploitation and extraction, but \[try\] to figure out how to bring
things to the point of collapse’.[^concl_1] Wind can break while water can
crash into things. The spectral events in the work of Charles and
Herregraven do not fix, mend or ameliorate anything, but rather
momentarily tear the black box of finance apart. Collapse and
catastrophe are here imagined as conditions to change, and as
manifestations of possibility.

Sometimes the only way to change is to rip something down. Herregraven
and Charles seem to suggest that another system is possible when this
one breaks. As Halberstam puts it:

> The question that seems most pertinent now, in an era of environmental
> decline, financial corruption \[is\] how do we unbuild the world? …The
> contemporary anarchist does not seek to make life better under the
> current conditions of exploitation and extraction, but tries, rather,
> to figure out how to bring things to the point of collapse.[^concl_2]

The spectral interventions of Herregraven and Charles dissociate the
black box of finance from its socio-technical infrastructure and break
it open to transformative encounters, represented by alternative forms
of relating and of presence, and by extension alternative ways of doing
economics. An observation made by Siddharta Mukherjee on homeostasis is
apposite here: ‘There’s a seemingly glassy transparency to things around
us that work, made visible only when the glass is cracked and
fissured.’[^concl_3] When glass cracks and fissures, it becomes marked. Shards
reveal the bits and pieces that together made up its smooth and shiny
surface. When glass shatters, it gives way to other spaces that exist
within the seemingly totalizing frame of the black box of finance.
Shaking and breaking stuff may open to alternatives that exist within
and roam amid the seemingly all-encompassing and never-ending spaces of
algorithmic capital accumulation. The desire to shake and break the
black box of finance, the desire to grind the machine to a halt and the
drift and force with which this happens in the artworks reflect the
resolute rejection of the operations of the black box of finance.
Further, breaking it down forms the mirror opposite of the perceived
helplessness and powerlessness in relation to and the imperviousness of
the black box of finance. As James Baldwin writes in a different
context: ‘Any real change implies the breakup of the world as one has
always known it, the loss of all that gave one an identity, the end of
safety.’[^concl_4] Real change might be for the better but might also be for
the worse, as everything is possible within the possible.

## Search Anxiety and the Possible of Passionate Acts

Chapter 4 discussed search anxiety, the anxieties surrounding the
centralization and corporatization of access to online information in
general, and specifically around Google’ search engine algorithms
because it is the most used search engine in Europe and the United
States at least. Google’s search engine evokes anxiety about the
possible exploitation of personal aggregated search data and the
algorithmically ranking and listing of search results in the interest
of, among other things, revenue. Search anxiety is about the possible in
relation to a shared dependence on one for-profit company for access to
online information. It revolves around the implication of quests for
knowledge shaped by a for-profit logic.

The chapter zoomed in on one significant artistic response that has come
in the form of an experimental film made by Camille Henrot that espouses
the act of collecting. *Grosse Fatigue* enacts web search as a form of
collecting within a collection and refers to Walter Benjamin’s
conceptualization of the collector. When linked to Kierkegaard’s notion
of passion, *Grosse Fatigue* shows a relationship to the centralised,
monetized, and ordered structures of Google’s search engine which
grounds search anxiety in possibility. This happens by reframing our
searching condition and the act that gives form to it, collecting, as a
passionate activity bordering on a feverish condition. To search is to
collect, and a collection represents an idea or value that the collector
feels passionate about and is strongly committed to. In other words, a
collection is a concrete abstraction: to collect is a concrete act that
happens in connection to abstract ideal, values and desire.

Kierkegaard claims that passion is one way to relate to the possible.
Passion can be described as an enduring desire that requires
nourishment, but that also nourishes you. In *The Undercommons: Fugitive
Planning & Black Study,* Stefano Harney and Fred B. Moten describe
passion as ‘the duty beyond duty’.[^concl_5] Passion, they argue, both
sustains and exceeds the self. Further, passion is an ambiguous force.
One feels passionate about something or someone, yet passion as a
feeling transcends that someone or something. As Harney and Moten
describe it, with passion, you step out of the anxiety of the unknown
and into what exceeds both truth and oneself.[^concl_6] Passion represents
something of intrinsic value, something that exceeds the logic of profit
and capital accumulation, something that transcends the present order of
things.

However, collecting, as Henrot performs it in *Grosse Fatigue*, does not
signal a break from nor exceeds the bounded and finite spaces of
Google's indexed web. Indeed, to search is to collect *within* Google’s
collection. Searching as collecting is collecting within a collection.
Forming a collection could be considered as the building of a box in the
theatre of the world, as Benjamin describes it. The box, the collection,
may represent a value or an idea around which a collector frames its
activities, not outside of or separate from but within the world. To
foster a collection is to establish relations that enable the coming
together of people and things that gravitate around (and are limited by)
a common value, aspiration, or ideal. To collect is to gravitate around
alternative values, valuables and different currencies than profit or
truth. Collecting is a response to Google’s favoring of traffic over
truth and clicks over content. It exceeds truth, traffic, clicks and
content. To reframe searching as collecting within a collection is a
limited and time-sensitive gesture oriented toward possibility, and
geared toward different relations and cohabitations within Google’s
engine — an act of worlding within the world-wide-web.

To search is to collect within a collection, and to collect is to foster
worlding —however brief, disorderly, and loosely organized. Collections,
like assemblages, ‘are defined by the strength of what they gather as
much as their always-possible dissipation’.[^concl_7] Like nodes and links on
the web, the relations and connections within an assemblage are
ephemeral, variable and fragile; they come together and fall apart, they
break and dissolve. The possible here is not about radical change,
necessarily, but about the endless ways to draw and re-draw relations
centered around shared values and strengthened by passion.

To return to the question posed at the start of this dissertation:
Tactics of collaboration, practices of mobilization, reorganization, and
rupture constitute the possible in relation to algorithmic anxiety.
Where masking and collecting are tactics of living with anxieties evoked
by search and facial recognition technology, the spectral calls for
radical change in relation to algorithmic trading systems by battling
through it.

## Movement at the Spot as the Response to Algorithmic Anxiety 

What becomes of the possible when Kierkegaard’s critique is aimed at
algorithmic culture? What ties masks, specters and collectors together?
Movement *at the spot*. Movement at the spot, Kierkegaard writes:
‘Neither moves from the place where it is nor arrives anywhere. \[It\]
is literally a movement in that place.’[^concl_8] Movement at the spot is not
reactionary, but imaginative and creative. This ‘movement of infinity’,
as Kierkegaard calls it in *Fear and Tremblin*g, is a way of thinking,
being, and imagining to preserve yourself, of creating a space to catch
a breath, to buy time, and to organize and reorganize.[^concl_9] It also
provides a metaphor for re-thinking and re-imagining the confining and
limiting aspects of algorithmic culture. When the algorithmic is
represented as becoming central in the organising, governing and
confining of the socio-political sphere and in the distribution of
wealth and information, movement is a way to battle the algorithmic
anxiety this evokes. What Kierkegaard describes as ‘movement at the
spot’ does not mean to — Romantically — fan the flames of faith and
passion, or to celebrate imagination and collaboration.[^concl_10] Neither
does it mean to jettison the algorithmic or to embrace it. Movement at
the spot is not merely a ‘fantasy of exit’.[^concl_11] Instead, movement at
the spot is a way to understand algorithmic anxiety as grounded in
necessity *and* possibility. Algorithmic anxiety could be considered as
a lack of movement, lost motion, or as the desire for motion.

The mask, the specter and the collector are figures of movement *at the
spot*. Where algorithmic regimes attempt to confine motion and openness,
movement is the response. What always moves is difficult to grasp, and
hence to be mathematically modelled, duplicated or regulated. Movement
at the spot challenges the logic of algorithmic entrapment. It is less
about what it will bring — again, everything is possible within the
possible — and more about actualizing the potentiality to shift
positions, to find a space to catch a breath. Masks, specters, and
collectors are about ‘finding ways through and around’.[^concl_12] In motion,
one can become aware of limits one did not know existed and imagine
possible ways around these delimitations. Living with algorithmic
anxiety requires motion. Masks, specters, and collectors tell us that
the algorithmic structures we inhabit and that inhibit us, in uneven and
unequal ways, might be challenged by moving at the spot, by actively
imagining moving through and around. They point to conditions for
change, and to make room, however small, in a confined space.

What becomes imaginable with movement? To move at the spot has a lot to
do with positioning. It is about shifting positions within the uneven
and unequal relations of power in the entanglement of the social and the
algorithmic by strengthening ties, practicing solidarity by organising
and re-grouping from within, as well by moving and breaking stuff.
Masks, specters, and collectors provide room for the desire to make
*and* unmake relations and connections, to produce zones of
indiscernibility *and* collective presence, and to tear down *and* to
re-arrange, assemble, and rebuild. As long as we fail to imagine
fissures, openings or alternatives to algorithmic culture, we remain
stuck and cornered in its grid. Masks, specters, and collectors offer a
vision of the possible. In writing about the aesthetics of possibility,
Ashton T. Crawley also connects possibility with imagination. He phrases
it thus: ‘possibilities exist alongside that which we can detect with
our finite sensual capacities’.[^concl_13] He adds: ‘Imagination is necessary
for thinking into the capacities of infinite alternatives.’[^concl_14]
Movement at the spot is a form of what Crawley calls ‘the nevertheless
and in spite of condition’: that though one may feel enclosed,
contained, circumscribed, ‘that — nevertheless, and in spite of — there
is an excessive force that sustains’.[^concl_15] The word ‘nevertheless’ and
the phrase ‘in spite of’ ‘mark the always available and plural otherwise
possibility’.[^concl_16] Movement at the spot symbolizes what *may* condition
otherwise possibilities. Kierkegaard observes: ‘Possibility is for the
self what oxygen is for breathing.’[^concl_17] ‘Drawing breath in Latin is
called *respiratio*, a word which indicates a flowing back of what had
first flowed out. In drawing breath the organism enjoys its freedom,’
Kierkegaard writes.[^concl_18] Movement at the spot symbolizes taking a deep
breath, the kind of breath taken just before someone makes a move.

Masks, specters and collectors represent different guises of possibility
*grounded in necessity*. This grounding in necessity is of key
importance. By grounding in necessity these figures, to refer to Donna
Harraway, stay with the trouble. To stay with the trouble, Haraway
writes in *Staying with the Trouble: Making Kin in the Chthulucene*
(2016), is to reject the cynics, the technofixes, and the
techno-apocalypses.[^concl_19] Staying with the trouble requires ‘unexpected
collaborations and combinations’ that are ‘always situated, someplace
and not no place, entangled’.[^concl_20] Masks, specters and collectors, as
figures of movement at the spot, stay with the trouble represented by
algorithmic regimes of confinement. Furthermore, in relation to
algorithmic confinement, they represent situated responses to
algorithmic anxiety. These situated responses are the result of
collaborations and unexpected combinations, prompting different ways of
relating to and refusing to succumb to the algorithmic trouble it finds
itself in. This requires the continual work of dissembling, reframing,
and repositioning. Taken together, masks, specters and collectors form
small gestures and creative experimentations with alternative ways of
establishing connections, of being with others, and subversive acts of
(dis)assembly. They point to where there is room to maneuver as well as
the limitations of the movement that they, in different ways, bring into
view.

## In Closing…

It would be too easy to judge these artistic figures of movement on the
basis of whether or not they have any measurable impact, or whether
these works lead to concrete outputs.[^concl_21] Admittedly, none of the
artworks discussed pave the way towards equivalence or equilibrium in
happy co-existence with algorithms. None of them tackles or undoes
algorithmic power abuses and ongoing capitalist exploitation in
algorithmic culture. Nor do they provide a clear-cut answer to the
amassing of personal data by corporations, to flash crashes on the
financial markets, or skewed and slanted search results. The notion of
movement at the spot will not assure those who want systematic and
step-by-step formulas to be freed from algorithmic anxiety, wholesale.
Nor will it please those concerned with policy recommendations, tools
and protocols on how to deal with internet monopolization, algorithmic
capitalism and surveillance, automated financial markets, or the
monetization of online communication and (dis)information. These figures
will not be able to assuage the anxieties of those who believe
technological determination means that we are already claimed by it.
Movement at the spot is not likely to change the minds of those for whom
the wedlock between capitalist corporations, the state, and algorithmic
exploitation reveals what the future will be and which renders artistic
interventions futile.

What movement at the spot offers is a contribution to the making of an
artistic imaginary of possibility characterized by convoluting,
entwining, and synthesizing relations. Movement at the spot is not
merely about understanding that many things take the shape of a
relational yet uneven synthesis or understanding the performativity of
the confining and delimitating representations of algorithms. Movement
at the spot imagines the possible as possible vis-a-vis the troubles it
is in. Yet, it never accepts these troubles as fixed, given, or
impervious to change, but continually seeks ways through, around, and in
between them. Movement at the spot is situated, embodied, yet also an
imaginative orientation towards possibility. It needs to be sustained by
the continual work of the synthesis of possibility and necessity and the
finite and the infinite. This work involves relational practices of
being, thinking and doing — concrete, imaginative, and otherwise, both
small and large — that bring movement into view.

Social life will continually find itself confronted, contained, and
constrained by continuously moving and changing mutations of algorithmic
confinement, capitalism, control, and governance. This is what
conditions movement at the spot, what mobilizes it into action.
Practices of movement at the spot are not merely up against ‘algorithmic
culture’ and its past, present and future mutations. Movement at the
spot is a response to the tendency to represent the present as an
all-encompassing, capitalist, and controlling power structure,
impervious to intervention or subversion. It is up against assertions
that relational experiments with alternative ways and practices of
being, thinking, and doing ‘will never work’, ‘are already co-opted’,
‘are too small to be meaningful’, and ‘won’t make a difference, anyway’,
and the like. It pushes back against cynicism, fatalism, determinism, or
the tendency to succumb to their substitutes, like neoliberalism,
nihilism, positivism, legalism, and so forth. It pushes back against
abstracted thinking about and limiting narratives of what is possible.
Movement at the spot is a minority position facing a multitude of forces
that act against it and that threaten to undermine it, and it might even
bring more harm than good. And yet, *nevertheless*…

[^concl_1]: Halberstam as cited in in Young, ‘Public Thinker’.

[^concl_2]: Halberstam as cited in in Young, ‘Public Thinker’.

[^concl_3]: S. Mukherjee, ‘My Father’s Body, At Rest and In Motion’, *The New
    Yorker*, 1 January 2018,
    https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/01/08/my-fathers-body-at-rest-and-in-motion.

[^concl_4]: Baldwin, ‘Faulkner and Desegregation’, 568.

[^concl_5]: Harney and Moten, *The Undercommons*, 35.

[^concl_6]: Harney and Moten, *The Undercommons*, 35.

[^concl_7]: Tsing, *The Mushroom at the End of the World*, 43.

[^concl_8]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 36.

[^concl_9]: Kierkegaard, *Fear and Trembling,* 36.

[^concl_10]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death*, 36.

[^concl_11]: S. Sharma, ‘Exit and the Extensions of Man’, Marshall McLuhan
    Lecture 2017,

    *Embassy of Canada,* Berlin, 2017,
    https://transmediale.de/content/exit-and-the-extensions-of-man. In
    her Marshall McLuhan Lecture of 2017, held in Berlin, Sarah Sharma
    critiques what she calls sExit strategies, which she describes as
    ‘male fantasies of exit’. Such exit strategies, she argues, fall
    heavily on gendered lines. ‘sExit is an exercise of patriarchal
    power.’ The point Sharma makes is that ‘sexodus’ has a gender, a
    class and a colour. ‘The white patriarchal penchant for exit rears
    its ugly head at any hint of having to live with one’s supremacy in
    question.’

[^concl_12]: J. Halberstam, ‘The Wild Beyond: With and for the Undercommons’,
    in S. Harney, and F. Moten, *The Undercommons: Fugitive Planning &
    Black Study*, New York: Minor Compositions, 2013, 6.

[^concl_13]: Crawley, *Blackpentecostal Breath*, 2.

[^concl_14]: Crawley, *Blackpentecostal Breath*, 5.

[^concl_15]: Crawley, *Blackpentecostal Breath*, 81.

[^concl_16]: Crawley, *Blackpentecostal Breath*, 82.

[^concl_17]: Kierkegaard, *The Sickness unto Death,* 40.

[^concl_18]: Kierkegaard, *Either/Or*, 1310.

[^concl_19]: Harraway, *Staying with the Trouble,* 3.

[^concl_20]: Harraway, *Staying with the Trouble,* 4.

[^concl_21]: In June 2019, an article in the *Financial Times* appeared that
    reported that Microsoft had pulled its database of 10m faces it used
    to train facial recognition systems around the world from the
    internet. ‘All three data sets were uncovered by Berlin-based
    researcher Adam Harvey, whose project *Megapixels* documented the
    details of dozens of data sets and how they are being used.’ M.
    Murgia, ‘Microsoft Quietly Deletes Largest Public Face Recognition
    Data Set’, *The Financial Times*, 6 June 2019,
    https://www.ft.com/content/7d3e0d6a-87a0-11e9-a028-86cea8523dc2.
